---
title: Nothing is in Itself Without the Other
seoTitle:
    Nothing is in Itself Without The Other - Hegel's Critique of Kant's Thing in
    Itself
description:
    Learn about why there is logically no thing in itself according to Hegel
isArticle: true
authors: Filip Niklas (2024)
editors:
contributors:
---

## Nothing is in Itself Without the Other

Hegel's account of `something` and `other` shows that what something is in
itself is inextricably bound with its relation to others, such that there is no
thing that purely is related to itself without also being related to others and,
likewise, no thing is merely related to others without having some intrinsic
being unto itself _apart_ from others. This is in stark contrast to Kant, who
famously distinguishes things in themselves from the way the appear (or are
experienced by human beings, i.e. from the way things in themselves are _for_
us).

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

<Callout>
    This article builds on the
    [development](/articles/hegel/reference/something-and-other/development) of
    `something` and `other`, and it is strongly recommended to read it first.
</Callout>

From Hegel's point of view, Kant's idea of a thing in itself that is entirely
distinct from how it appears for us&mdash;its "being-for-us"&mdash;is an
abstraction that, when examined carefully, proves to be logically incoherent.

Before elaborating on this argument, however, Houlgate claims that Hegel subtly
misunderstands Kant's concept of the thing in itself, "Hegel takes Kant's
concept of the 'thing-in-itself' to refer, not only to what is objective rather
than subjective, but to what things are objectively, to what they really _are_
in themselves; that is, he conflates Kant's thing in itself with _being_"
(Houlgate 2022, 31). But Kant's thing in itself is not a real unreachable
_thing_, but an abstraction produced by thought itself.

TBA

Following Stephen Houlgate's reading, Kant has epistemic reasons for placing
things in themselves entirely beyond our experience (Houlgate 2022, 191). For
Kant, experience is conditioned by _a priori_ forms of intuition that are purely
subjective&mdash;or peculiar to _all_ human beings&mdash;which means those forms
cannot disclose what the objects of experience may be independently from
experience (see Kant 1998, 159/A26/B42). This leads to the idea that there is
something which only relates only to itself without relating to others. "In
Hegel's view", Houlgate writes, "Kant's _epistemic_ arguments are undermined by
the _onto-logical_ insight that what something is in itself is necessarily
present _in_ its relation to what is other" (Houlgate 2022, 191).

191
