---
title: Sublation
description: Learn about sublation from Hegel's philosophy.
isArticle: true
authors: Filip Niklas (2024)
editors:
contributors:
---

## Sublation

> _To sublate_ and _being sublated_ (the _idealized_) constitute one of the most
> important concepts of philosophy (Hegel 2010, 81/21.94).

The importance of the concept of sublation [_Aufhebung_] in Hegel's philosophy
cannot be understated. It is a notion that is virtually omnipresent in Hegel's
entire systematic oeuvre and plays a chief role in the dialectical determination
of ideas and concepts.

However, despite its pivotal significance, it does not receive direct treatment
in _The Science of Logic_, Hegel's major work on logic and metaphysics, apart
from a remark that follows the
[`development of becoming`](/hegel/reference/becoming/development). The remark
in question, however, is instructive given its context and illustrates the
essential three-pronged structure of sublation.

While sublation enjoys common usage in the German language, there is no direct
equivalent in English. And so sublation has become something of a highly
technical term that is most often used in Hegelian scholarship. This is
unfortunate, since the speculative element in the word itself never natively
manifests to the thinker, and one must continuously bring together disparate
meanings into this rather awkward term.

### Semantics

The German _aufheben_ has a twofold meaning, Hegel writes. On the one hand, it
means to _to keep_ or _to preserve_. On the other hand, it means _to cause to
cease_ or _to put an end to_.

But to preserve something, Hegel notes, has a negative tinge to it because to
preserve something one must remove it from its immediacy in order to _retain_
it; and, in so doing, the matter is essentially open to external influences. One
might say that to keep something may mean to hold on to it or secure it, but
thereby losing its innocence. "That which is sublated is thus something at the
same time preserved, something that has lost its immediacy but has not come to
nothing for that" (Hegel 2010, 82/21.94). It can seen already how the meaning of
keeping here cannot but entail negation. This slippage from one idea to the
other is exactly the dialectical thread Hegel puts under the magnifying glass.

Hegel praises words in language that have such double-meanings and notes the
Latin _tollere_, which serves as the root for the English "toll" (payment) and
"extol" (praise). In particular, he notes the deficiency with _tollere_ that its
positive determination only goes as far as "lifting up" (whereas _aufheben_
enjoys the additional notion of preserving).

However, Hegel does not directly state the _three_ meanings of sublation, even
though they are all implied in the text.This lack of stating it expressly
appears puzzling given that his own usage relies heavily on it.

### Structure

_tbc_
