---
title: Overview
seoTitle: Overview of Limit in Hegel's Logic
description:
    Overview page for the category of limit from Hegel's Science of Logic.
isArticle: false
searchable: false
---

## Overview of Limit

`Limit` (_Grenze_) is the category through which a `something` attains its full
determinacy by being set off from others &ndash; but in a way that ultimately
leads to its own dissolution. A `limit` is not merely an external boundary drawn
from without, but the inner moment through which `something` defines itself by
excluding what it is not. In contrast to mere otherness or relation, the limit
is the active negation of otherness, a declaration of “not that” &ndash; and
yet, this very act of negation is what _connects_ the thing to what lies beyond
it.

Every `something` stands in relation to another, but it only becomes fully
self-related by positing its `non-being` — its negated other — as a constitutive
part of its being. In this way, `limit` internalizes the boundary between the
thing and its other. The contradiction follows that the more a `something` is
itself through its `limit`, the more it also points beyond itself &ndash; since
the `limit` that defines it also defines what it is not, and thereby opens onto
that `other`. The `limit`, then, if Hegel is right, is not a hard border but a
site of mediation and passage.

Hegel shows that the logic of `limit` leads to a reversal: the thing that sets
itself apart by its `limit` is, by that same gesture, brought into relation with
its beyond. What is outside the `limit` becomes essential to what is inside.
Thus, a thing's attempt to preserve its identity through self-limitation ends by
surpassing itself, pointing toward its own finitude. `Limit` becomes the field
at which `something's` effort to be what it is collapses into what it is not
&ndash; not by accident, but by necessity.

This immanent self-transcendence of the thing through its own `limit` marks the
beginning of the dialectic of `finitude`, wherein every finite being reveals its
inherent tendency to go beyond itself and bring itself to an end &ndash; not
despite its limit, but through it.
